            Foreword
 The following pages are a typed facsimile transcription of Thomas Merton's holographic journal designated #10, "The Red Diary,"in the Thomas Merton Studies Center Collection at Bellarmine College, Louisville, Kentucky. In addition to the facsimile, the transcribers have appended notes, English translations from the Greek, Latin and French, an index, a bibliography of confirmed sources used by Merton, and a page-by-page synopsis of the complete journal.
            The original journal is a red-leather, day-by-day calendar journal for 1959 and thus has received its title, The Red Diary. Of the possible 365 pages for entries, Merton used only 63: his first entry appears on page 4, designated for January 3, 1959; the final entry is on page 66, designated for March 4, 1959. The remaining pages of the calendar diary are blank.
            The Red Diary was obviously dated 1959 in the Thomas Merton Studies Center Collection, but there is ample evidence to prove that not all, and perhaps not any, of the entries were made by Merton in 1959. Page X (43) bears the date November, 1964. Page X (50) bears the date January 31, 1965, Merton's fiftieth birthday. An interrelated portion of the journal [pp. X(45-66)],entitled by Merton an "Office for Hermits", was begun after November, 1964 and either completed or abandoned in early 1965. It is difficult, though admittedly not impossible, to assume that, during a six year period, Merton would have filled only 63 pages in the diary. And since all the journal's entries are similar, what can be described as an anthology or florilegium of favorite passages from Merton's lectio divina, the entries in the journal are assumed to be more accurately dated 1964-65 than 1959. Given this assumption, Merton saves or finds unused a red-leather diary for 1959 which becomes another journal in the mid-sixties.
            Although no personal journal entries by Merton appear in this diary it is a collection of the words of others The Red Diary reveals Merton intimately. The Red Diary is a convergence of Merton's spontaneous attractions. The quotations exhibit Merton's instinct for the essential and the luminous in his reading. And by what he selects to save Merton reveals his own interior climate. The journal section entitled an Office for Hermits is especially significant. Here Merton looks forward to his living at his hermitage full time and thus arms himself with a word from his monastic fathers, both Latin and Greek, and from the Scriptures, especially the prophetic and wisdom books. These collected "words" reflect his fears and his hopes, and more importantly they reflect his prayer, at this new and long awaited juncture in his life.
            This transcription is a collaboration of friends. Dr. Erasmo Leiva-Merikakis Professor of Comparative Literature and on the faculty of the St. Ignatius Institute of the University of San Francisco, transcribed and translated the Greek, French, and Latin sections of the journal. Jonathan Montaldo transcribed the remaining sections and is responsible for the addenda to the text.
            The transcription of Thomas Merton's "Red Diary" was completed under the direction of Dr. Robert E. Daggy, Director of Research for the Thomas Merton Legacy Trust and the Director of the Thomas Merton Center at Bellarmine College. This transcription and its addenda are the property of Bellarmine College. All rights to the use of this transcription are reserved by the provisions of the Thomas Merton Legacy Trust and by Bellarmine College.
    Erasmo Leiva-Merikakis,
    San Francisco, California 
     Jonathan Montaldo, 
	Collingswood, New Jersey
	January 31, 1989
         
      


	
	  1959
		Saturday 3 January
	  
	3rd day - 362 days to come
	 
            X (4)
	
	Πάτερ ἥμων ὸ εν τοις οὐρανοις ἁγιαρθήτω τὸ ὄνομά σου ἐλθάτω ἡ βασιλεία σου γενηθήτω το θέλεμά σου ὡς εν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς · τον ἄρτον ἡμων τόυ ἐπιούπονδός ἠμιν σήμερον · καὶ ἄφες ἠμίν ία οφειλήματα ἠμων ὡς καὶ ἡμεῑς ἀφὴκαμευ τοῑςὀφειλέταις ἡμων · και μη εἰτενέγκῃς ἡμας εἰς πειρασμον, ἀλλὰ ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ του πονηροῦ .
	
	


	
	            1959
		Sunday 4 January
	    Second Sunday after Christmas
	  
	4th day - 361 days to come
	 
            X (5)
	
	
               O Lord and Master of my life, give me
               not a spirit of sloth, of despondency, of lust or
               of vain talking; but bestow on me thy
               servant a spirit of chastity, of humility,
               of patience and love. You, O Lord and
               King, grant to me to see my own errors
               & not to judge my brother, for blessed
               art thou unto ages of ages.ˇ
            (Popular in C19Russia)
            
                        Ephraem, Syrus, SaintSt. Ephrem

	
	
	"All the essence of Xtianity is contained in this prayer."
            
                        Dostoyevsky, FyodorDostoyevsky.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Monday 5 January
	  
	5th day - 360 days to come
	 
            X (6)
	
	 "The one who is offended can forgive; the offender never
forgives; from his crime sprouts hatred. A Christian can be a serf but must not be a slave-owner."
	
	            KhomiakovKhomiakov 
	
	
            "Christianity does not touch but illuminates."
	            Aksakov, I. S. (Ivan Sergeevich)Aksakov  .
		
        


	
	  1959
		Tuesday 6 January
	    Feast of the Epiphany
	  
	6th day - 359 days to come
	 
            X (7)
	
            Few men are Johnsons; yet how many men  at this
day are assailed by incessant  demands on their mental powers which
only  a productiveness like his could suitably supply!  There is a
demand for reckless originality  of thought & a sparkling
plausibility of  agreement which he would have despised even if he
could have displayed; a demand for crude theory & unsound
philosophy rather than none at all.
            

                        Newman, John HenryNewman
.
	
	
            What must be the toil of those whose intellects are to be flaunted
daily before the public in full dress, & underdress ever new &
varied, & spun, like the silkworm's, out of themselves.

Merton identified with John Henry
Newman. Of Newman Merton wrote elsewhere: "There are people one
meets in books or in life whom one does not merely observe, meet, or
know.  A deep resonance of one's entire being is immediately set up
with the entire being of the other (Cor ad cor
loquitur)--heart speaks to heart in the wholeness of the language
of music; true friendship is a kind of singing."Conjectures of A Guilty Bystander. (New York: Image Books, 1968),
p. 188.
            

                        Newman, John HenryNewman


.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Wednesday 7 January
	  
	7th day - 358 days to come
	 
            X (8)
	
            "Let meekness, simplicity, condescension to
those lower than yourselves, condescension which would put you on an
equal level with the lowest among them, let quietness in humiliation,
patience which no offence could overwhelm, let all this become your
mind as it was of Christ Jesus."
            
                        Filaret, Metropolitan of MoscowMet.

 Filaret 
	[tropolitan]
	
         


	
	  1959
		Thursday 8 January
	  
	8th day - 357 days to come
	 
            X (9)
	
            "As fellow workers of the loving Christ's Spirit,
the holy men of God bear, by the grace of Christ, human sinful
weaknesses & humiliations as if they were themselves liable to
spiritual foolishness. According to such heroism of faith & love,
the grace of God does not abandon men who freely give themselves to
these dishonoring weaknesses & silliness, but meekly &
patiently He brings them to the path of Truth. Ordinary men pass
gradually from their childish mind into the life of sane intelligence
because these others, in their gracious love offer themselves to the
hard death of frank madness in the eyes of men. Such is the mystery
& significance of foolishness for Christ's sake."
            
                        Bukharev, A. M. (Aleksandr Matveevich)A. M. Bukharev

k.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Friday 9 January
	  
	9th day - 356 days to come
	 
            X (10)
	
            The heavenly Father uttered His hypostatic or personal Word &
all came into being; but uttering His thought & His will about the
existence of creation, He, at the same time, was determining for His
own personal Word or Son to take upon him the burden of all - already
foreseen - sinful disorders of the world. God the Word was mightily
creating according to the thought of His Father but already He was
dooming Himself to the immeasurable self-sacrifice in order to keep
this new created world in the meaning & designation given to it --
even in spite of the foreseen infidelity of the world to its meaning
& designation.
            
                        Bukharev, A. M. (Aleksandr Matveevich)A. M. Bukharev

 (on Job)
	
         


	
	  1959
		Saturday 10 January
	  
	10th day - 355 days to come
	 
            X (11)
	
            "As for the secular world for the sake of which Bukharev left his
monastery, it did not hear his voice & did not realize that he was
suffering in order to redeem & to unite with Christ the secular
art & thought so often suspected by the clergy as an enemy."
            
                        GovodetzkyGovodetzky

.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Sunday 11 January
	    First Sunday after Epiphany --
	Alexander Hamilton, born 1757
	  
	11th day - 354 days to come
	 
            X (12)
	
            Christ suffers and is crucified in the world because the sacrifice
of Golgatha is still repeated in the world until he comes. The Lord in
His glorified manhood is sitting at the right hand of the Father, but
in the earthly manhood of which He is the new Adam, in His Body the
Church, which is still in the state of Christ militant, Christ dwells
not only in His glorification but in His kenosis also.
            
                        Boulgakov, SergeBoulgakov


            
            
	
         
 Heraclitus

  


	
	  1959
		Monday 12 January
	  
	12th day - 353 days to come
	 
            X (13)
            
                        HeraclitusHERACLITUS

k
	
            Aion is a child at play, playing
draughts; the Kingship is a child's.
	-- Fr 52
	
	
	  I sought for myself.
	  Fr. 101
	


	His opinions were in general that all things are composed from fire & into this they are resolved; Everything comes to be through fate and existing things are connected through this turning in opposite directions.All things are full of souls & daimons...
	He called conflict a sacred disease and seeing, being deceived.

         
         



	
	  1959
		Tuesday 13 January
	  
	13th day - 352 days to come
	 
            X (14)
	
	            HeraclitusHeraclitus
            (Diog.[enes])
	They say that when asked why he was silent,
he replied - "That you may babble." .
	
            Do not be in a hurry to unwind to the center stick the roll of
Heraclitus the Ephesian; the path is hard indeed to traverse. There is
gloom and unrelieved darkness; but if an initiate leads you it shines
more brightly than the shining sun.
	
            Those who speak with sense
must rely on what is common to all, as a city must rely on its law...
(nb. common remains unknown to most)
            The divine law has as much power as it wishes &
is sufficient for all & is still left over.
            Frag 114
	
         
         



	
	  1959
		Wednesday 14 January
	  
	14th day - 351 days to come
	 
            X (15)
	
             
                        
                        HeraclitusHeraklitus
                        
                        
            Therefore it is necessary to follow the common: but although the
logos is common the many live as though they had a private
understanding. Fr. 2
	
	
            To god all things are beautiful & good and just; but men have
supposed some things to be unjust, others just.
Fr 102
	
	
            The up & the down is one and the
same.Fr 60.
	
	
	    The beginning & end of a circle are
common.
	(70.b)  (Fr 103)
	
         



	
	  1959
		Thursday 15 January
	  
	15th day - 350 days to come
	 
            X (16)
	
            "Celui qui cherche et trouve l'Esprit du Christ en agissant bien, 
celui[-]là progresse
beaucoup plus sûrement que celui [qui] ne vaque
qu'à la seule prière: oui, celui qui atteint le Christ dans
l'action et celui qui l'atteint dans la prière son souvent comme celui
qui l'atteint en réalité et celui qui l'atteint en désir."

Whoever seeks and finds
the Spirit of Christ through right action makes much surer progress
than whoever dedicates himself solely to prayer: indeed, the person
who attains to Christ through action and the person who attains to him
through prayer are often like one who attains to him in reality and
one who attains to him in desire.
            B1. 

                        Favre, PierrePeter Favre, S.J.

 (1)
	
         


	
	  1959
		Friday 16 January
	  
	16th day - 349 days to come
	 
            X (17)
	
            "Nous serons merveilleusement encouragés si nous nous rappelons
souvent et serieusement que nous sommes mandatés auprès du prochain,
non seulement par le Supérieur mais par le Christ
lui-méme."
 We would derive wonderful
encouragement from remembering, often and seriously, that we have
received our mission toward our neighbor not only from our Superior
but from Christ himself.
            
                        Canisius, Petrus, SaintSt. Peter Canisius

k [S.J.]
	
         


	
	  1959
		Saturday 17 January
	    Benjamin Franklin--Born 1706
	  
	17th day - 348 days to come
	 
            X (18)
	
            L'Eternel semble tenir à cela en nous par quoi nous différons de
Lui.  Durables, nous lui serions peut[-]être comme les pierres nous
sont: indifférents.
 The Eternal [God] seems to be especially keen on that part of
us that makes us different from Himself. If we had permanence, we
would probably be toward him what the stones are toward us:
indifferent.
	
	            Lanza del VastoLanza del Vasto 
	
	
	
	Ils ne sauront jamais ce qu'est
la Beauté, ceux qui la cherchent à leur aise et la prennent pour un
plaisir de plus.
     What Beauty is will never be known by those who search
	for it on their own comfortable terms and take it to be but one more pleasure.
	            Lanza del VastoLanza del Vasto	  
	
	
         


	
	  1959
		Sunday 18 January
  	    Second Sunday after Epiphany--Transfiguarion (Lutheran)
	  
	18th day - 347 days to come
	 
            X (19)
	
            When a man finds it is his destiny to suffer he will have to accept
suffering as His Task, his single and unique task. He will have to
acknowledge the fact that even in suffering he is unique & alone
in the universe. No one can relieve him of his suffering or suffer in
his stead. His unique opportunity lies in the way in which he bears
his burden.
            
                        Frankl, VictorV. Frankl
            .
	  Death Camp to Existentialism 
		p. 78

         


	
	  1959
		Monday 19 January
	    Robert E. Lee--Born 1807
	  
	19th day - 346 days to come
	 
            X (20)
	
            There is also purpose in that life which is
almost barren of both creation and enjoyment & which admits of but
one possibility of high moral behavior, namely in man's attitude to
his existence.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Tuesday 20 January
	  
	20th day - 345 days to come
	 
            X(21)

         


	
	  1959
		Wednesday 21 January
	    Stonewall Jackson--Born 1824
	  
	21st day - 344 days to come
	 
            X(22)
	
            In the presence of Rabbi Hanina one went to the praying desk to
say the prayer. He said 'God, thou great, strong, terrible,
mighty, feared, powerful, real & adorable.'  He waited until the
other had finished & then said to him: 'Have you ended with
the praise of your God? What is the meaning of all this? It is as if
one were to praise a king of this world who has millions of pieces of
gold for having one piece of silver.'
            quoted in 
                        Scholem, Gershom GerhardScholem
            . Main Trends in Jewish Mysticism p. 60
Scholem, Gershom G.
	Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. 
	New York: Schocken Books,
Inc., 1946.
	  
	 
       


	
	  1959
		Thursday 22 January
	  
	22nd day - 343 days to come
	 
            X (23)
	
            La personnalité n'est pas seulement une
chance [chose?] fragile à
favoriser ou à defendre: [elle] est le mystere le plus profond de 
l'univers ontologique.  
    The personality is not only a fragile
thing [?] to be either fostered or forbidden: it is the deepest mystery of the ontological universe.
            

                        Bars, HenryH. Bars



Maritain en Notre Temps
Bars, Henry. 
	Maritain en Notre Temps. 
	Paris: Editions Bernard
Grasset, 1959.

	
	
            Une philosophie qui n'est pas antique est tout de suite vieille.
            A philosophy which is not ancient is immediately
old.
            
                        Maritain, JacquesJ. Maritain
	
         
 Chuang-Tzu

  


	
	  1959
		Friday 23 January
	  
	23rd day - 342 days to come
	 
            X (24)
	
            
                        Chuang-TzuChuang Tzu

.
            The true men of old did not reject
the views of the few; they did not seek to accomplish their ends like
heroes; they did not lay plans to attain those ends. Being such,
though they might [make] mistakes, yet they had no occasion for
repentance; though they might succede [sic], they had no
complacency... So it was that by their knowledge they ascended to &
reached the Tao.
	V. 1.2 
	
         
         



	
	  1959
		Saturday 24 January
	  
	24th day - 341 days to come
	 
            X (25)
	
      
                  Chuang-TzuChuang Tzu

.
            The true men of old knew nothing of the love of life & the
hatred of death ... They accepted their life & rejoiced in it, they
forgot all fear of death ... Thus there was in them what is called the
want of any mind to resist the Tao & 
of all attempts by means of the human to assist the Heavenly.
            V1. 2.
	
	
            Their minds were free from all thought, their demeanor was still & unmoved ...They did in regard to all things what was suitable & no one could know how far their action would go.
            V. 1. 3.
	
         
         



	
	  1959
		Sunday 25 January
	    Septuagesima
	  
	25th day - 340 days to come
	 
            X (26)
	
            

                        Chuang-TzuChuang-Tzu

k
            
            He who tries to share his joys with others
is not a sagely man; he who manifests affection is not benevolent; he
who observes times & seasons is not a man of wisdom; he to whom
profit & injury are not the same is not a superior man...
	V1.3.
	
	
	When the springs are dried up the fishes collect
together on the land. Then that they should moisten one another there
by the damp about them ... it  were better for them to forget one
another in the rivers & lakes.	
	V1. 5.
	
         
         



	
	  1959
		Monday 26 January
	    Conversion of St. Paul (From Jan. 25th)
	  
	26th day - 339 days to come
	 
            X (27)
	
	
	            Chuang-TzuChuang Tzu	            
	            
	            
	            
	
           The Tao is a thing which accompanies all other
things & meets them, which is present when they are overthrown
& when they obtain their completion. Its name is Tranquillity amid
all disturbances, meaning that such disturbances lead to its
perfection.
            V1-8
	
         
         



	
	  1959
		Tuesday 27 January
	  
	27th day - 338 days to come
	 
            X (28)
	
	
	            
	            Chuang-TzuChuang Tzu
	
            "Fishes forget one another in the rivers and lakes, men forget one
another in the acts of the Tao."
            V1. 11.
	
	
            When one rests in what has been arranged & puts away all
thought of the transformation, he is in unity with the mysterious
heaven.
	     V1. 12.
	

             In the light of these
and the preceding Merton selections from 
Chuang Tzu, this: Reading Chuang Tzu, I wonder seriously if the wisest
answer (on the human level, apart from the answer of faith) is not
beyond both ethics and politics. It is a hidden answer, it defies
analysis and cannot be embodied in a program. Ethics and politics, of
course: but only in passing, only as a "night's lodging." There is
a time for action, a time for "commitment," but never for total
involvement in the intricacies  of a movement. There is a moment of
innocence and kairos, when action makes a great deal of
sense. But who can recognize such moments? Not he who is debauched by
a series of programs. And when all action has become absurd, shall one
continue to act simply because once, a long time ago, it made a great
deal of sense? As if one were always getting somewhere? There is a
time to listen, in the active life as everywhere else, and the better
part of action is waiting, not knowing what next, and not having a
glib answer.Conjectures of A Guilty Bystander, p. 173. 
         



	
	  1959
		Wednesday 28 January
	  
	28th day - 337 days to come
	 
            X (29)
	
            "O Wisdom, gone away, gone, gone to the other shore, landed on the
other shore Suatra!"
            Prajnaparamita Sutra
	
	
            Le secret de nos coeurs est une seule vierge que ni l'imagination
du reveur ni le penser du penseur ne déflore ... Le secret du coeur
c'est ce pour quoi Dieu s'est caché à ses créatures et ce pour quoi il
s'en rapproche.
The secret of our hearts is a solitary virgin
which neither the dreamer's imagination nor the thinker's thoughts
succeed in deflowering ... The secret of the heart is that for which
God has hidden himself from his creatures and that for which he comes
close to them.
            

                        HaleqseeHaleqsee

. see

            Basetti-Sani, GiulioGiulio Basetti-Sani OFM

	Mohammed et St. Francois, p 268 n 35.
Basetti-Sani, Giulio.
	Mohammed et Saint Francois.
	Ottawa: Commissariat De Terre-Sainte, 1959.

	
         


	
	  1959
		Thursday 29 January
	  
	29th day - 336 days to come
	 
            X (30)
	
            Silence & longsuffering are the most perfect acts that a man
may have. For it is by this silence & patience that he lives and,
if he wants to speak, or if he wants to let others speak through him,
it makes him mortal. If he really wants to live, he should always
remain silent & suffer God alone to speak, for what God utters is
life.
            The Book of the Poor in Spirit:
p 131
A Friend of God
(14th Century). 
	The Book of the Poor in Spirit.
	 Edited by C.F. Kelley.
	New York: Harper
	Brothers, 1954.

	
         


	
	  1959
		Friday 30 January
	  
	30th day - 335 days to come
	 
            X (31)
	
            
                        Chuang-TzuChuang Tzu
            Perfect enjoyment is to be
without enjoyment; the highest praise is to be without praise.
	XVIII. 1.
	
	
Heaven
does nothing & thence comes its security; Earth does nothing &
thence comes its rest. By the union of these two inactivities all
things are produced.... All things in their variety come from this
inaction.
	id.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Saturday 31 January
	  
	31st day - 334 days to come
	 
            X (32)
	
            La sainteté est douloureuse, tant
qu'elle n'est pas de tous.
Holiness is painful as long as it is not shared by all.
            
                        Clement, O.O. Clement
	
	
            Every reverse is a pointer to some spiritual truth that we were in
danger of forgetting. You therefore should strive calmly to settle
down & examine from this point of view the reverse that has so
deeply shocked you.
            
                        Macarius, Staretz of OptinoStaretz Macarius of Optino

k
	
	
            The wood of this cross that now breaks your back first grew in the
soil of your heart.
            

                        Macarius, Staretz of OptinoStaretz Macarius of Opt

[ino]

	

         


	
	  1959
		Sunday 1 February
	    Sexagesima
	  
	32nd day - 333 days to come
	 
            X (33)
	
            When we are incapable of scaling the peaks of virtue, all we have
to do is descend into the ravine of humility. Our humility is our
great intecessor before the face of the Lord.
	
	            Macarius, Staretz of OptinoMacarious of Optino            
	            
	             
	
	
	If
the soul loves and pities the people its prayer is not
interrupted.

            Silouan, StaretzStaretz Silouan
	
	
	Salvation lies in Christ like humility.
	id.
	

In Conjectures, p. 164, Merton mistakenly
ascribes the following extended quotation from Staretz Silouan to a
Staretz Sylvan: He said: 

I became steward as an act of obedience blessed by the Abbot,
so I pray better at my task than I prayed at the Old Rossikon [where
he had a solitary hut] where I asked to go for the sake of interior
silence. If the soul loves and pities the people, prayer is not
interrupted. from The Undistorted Image,
biography of Staretz Sylvan (sic), by Archimandrite
Sophrony.

The correct reference for this quotation of Staretz Silouan, both in
Conjectures and "The Red Diary" 
is: Sofrony, Archimandrite. The Undistorted Image. Translated
by Rosemary Edmonds from the
Russian. London: The Faith
Press, 1958.

         


	
	  1959
		Monday 2 February
	    Purification B. V. Mary--Groundhog Day
	  
	33rd day - 332 days to come
	 
            X (34)
	
             Not one of us can boast of having acquired humility: our actions,
the whole of our life, prove the contrary. And where there is lack of
humility pride is always present. Where light is wanting, darkness
reigns. 
            
                        Macarius, Staretz of OptinoStaretz Macarius of Opt[ino]
	
	
            In the vast sea which is the life of the church the true tradition
of the Spirit flows like a clear pure stream & he who would be in
this stream must renounce argument. When anything of self is
introduced the waters no longer run clear, for God's supreme wisdom
& truth are the opposite of human wisdom & truth. Such
renun-ciation appears intolerable, insane, to the self-willed, but the
man who is not afraid to become a fool has found true life &
true wisdom.
            
                        Sophrony, ArchimandriteArch.



 Sophrony
[imandrite]

	
         


	
	  1959
		Tuesday 3 February
	  
	34th day - 331 days to come
	 
            X (35)
	
             The praying mind does not think, does not reason--it lives. Its
activity does not consist in the manipulation of abstract concepts but
in participating in being. It is concerned with actual existence, an
existence which cannot be included within the narrow framework of
human concepts.
            
                        Sophrony, ArchimandriteArchimandrite  Sophrony


	
	
            The certain sign by which to recognize good from evil is not so
much the end, which may appear to be holy and sublime, as the means
selected to achieve the end.
            
                        Sophrony, ArchimandriteArchimandrite Sophrony
	
         


	
	  1959
		Wednesday 4 February
	  
	35th day - 330 days to come
	 
            X (36)
	
             Blessed are the meek... To understand who the meek are we shall
have to hold fast to Jesus... The meek are those who have truly
humbled themselves, those who have been truly humiliated, those who
have truly fallen from the height to the depths.
	            Barth, KarlK. Barth 
	
         


	
	  1959
		Thursday 5 February
	  
	36th day - 329 days to come
	 
            X (37)
	
	            (Heschel, Abraham JoshuaHeschel - Between God & Man)
            Ultimate meaning and
ultimate wisdom are not found within the world but in God & the
only way to wisdom is through our relationship to God. This
relationship is awe. Awe in this sense is more than an
emotion; it is away of understanding. Knowledge is fostered by
curiosity, wisdom p 52 is fostered by awe.
	            Heschel, Abraham JoshuaA. Heschel 
	
	
             The secret of every being is the divine care & concern that
are invested in it.
            id.
	
	
            We must be guided by awe to be worthy of faith.
            id. 53.

	

	Heschel, Abraham J. Between God and Man. Edited by Fritz A. Rothschild. Toronto: Collier-Macmillan, 1959.

         


	
	  1959
		Friday 6 February
	  
	37th day - 328 days to come
	 
            X (38)
	
            The truth as it is contained in Christian revelation includes the
cognition that it is neither possible to know the truth fully nor to
avoid the error of pretending that he does. It is recognized that
'grace' always remains in partial contradiction to 'nature' & is
not merely its fulfillment. 
	            Niebuhr, ReinholdR. Niebuhr
	
            In the light of this
Niebuhr passage, this from Merton's private 
journal entry of October 20, 1964:
At the same time I am beginning to see that the question of
solitude for me is finally getting to be no longer a question of
desire but of decision. I still do not know what scope for
decision may be given me, but I do know that I must prepare to face a
serious decision and one about which I had more or less given up
thinking and hoping. It seems to be a real encounter with the
Word that I must not evade. Yet as in all such things, I am not too
sure just where the encounter is except that my heart tells me
that in this question of the solitary life there is for me a special
truth to be embraced. A truth which is not capable of fully logical
explanation. A truth which is not rooted in ms own nature or in my own
biography, but is something deeper and something that may also
cut clean through the whole network of my own recent works, ideas,
writing, experiences and so forth... .  [emphasis added]
                  
A Vow of Conversation. Edited & introduced by Naomi
Burton Stone. New York:
Farrar, Straus, Giroux,
1988. p. 88 
            
         


	
	  1959
		Saturday 7 February
	  
	38th day - 327 days to come
	 
            X (39)
	
            Individualism understands only a part of man; collectivism
understands man only as a part. Neither advances to the wholeness of
man, to man as a whole. Individualism sees man only in relation to
himself, but collectivism does not see 'man' at all, it sees
only 'society'.
	            Buber, MartinMartin Buber
	
	
  The individual is not an end in
himself & cannot live within himself. Love is the law of his
existence. Niebuhr, ReinholdR. Niebuhr
	
         


	
	  1959
		Sunday 8 February
	    Quinquagesima
	  
	39th day - 326 days to come
	 
            X (40)
	
            The problem of the individual & the community cannot
be solved at all if the height is not achieved where the sovereign
source & end of both individual & communal existence are
discerned; & where the limits are set against the idolatrous
selfworship of both individuals and communities.
	            Niebuhr, ReinholdR. Niebuhr
	
         


	
	  1959
		Monday 9 February
	  
	40th day - 325 days to come
	 
            X (41)
	
            If modern churches were to symbolize their true faith, they would
take the crucifix from their altars and substitute the three little
monkeys who counsel men to 'speak no evil, hear no evil, see no
evil.'
	            Niebuhr, ReinholdR. Niebuhr
	
	
            Racial pride is revealed today to be man's primary collective
sin.
	            Niebuhr, ReinholdR. Niebuhr
	

            Merton incorporates the second Niebuhr quotation in a journal
entry. This is a good example of how Merton's reading became a
springboard for his own expression:
Someone has come out with the
theory that racial injustice is the product of
individualism. There may be something to it, in the sense
that individualism is a component in the lawlessness and
irresponsibility of a society that has no care whatever to treat other
human beings as if they might conceivably have human needs,
and rights. In a sense, even Nazism was a result of
individualism.   Mass society is indeed made up of individuals who,
left to themselves, know they are zero, and who, added together in a
multitude of zeroes, seem to themselves to acquire reality and
power. But this is the negative individualism of the man who thinks he
establishes himself as real by comparing himself with everything that
is not-I. (When you count up enough things that are not-I, you end
up by discovering that even I is not-I.) But, meanwhile, what is to
blame is not individualism but collectivism. Reinhold Niebuhr says
rightly: "Racial pride is revealed today as man's
primary collective
sin."Conjectures, p. 56.
         


	
	  1959
		Tuesday 10 February
	    Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras., Ala., Fl., La.)
	  
	41st day - 324 days to come
	 
            X (42)
	
            "On perd toujours quelque chose auprès de Dieu lorsqu'on veut trop
justifier auprès des hommes."
            Something is always lost in the sight of God when we want to justify
too much in the sight of men.
	            MabillonMabillon
	
	
            Ceux[-]là 
seuls ont puissamment agi qui, au gout de l'éternel et de 
la réflexion solitaire, ont joint quelque passion apostolique, chez
qui la quete du Vrai a été soutenue sans cesse par le désir d'aider, de
réformer les hommes, et qui n'ont accepté la retraite que pour
concentrer leur flamme et vue d'un rayonnement plus lumineux et plus
ardent.
            Only they have
acted with power who, to their penchant for the 
eternal and for solitary reflection, have added some form of apostolic
passion: only those in whom the quest for the True has incessantly
been sustained by a desire to aid and reform men, and who have
consented to withdraw from the world only in order to concentrate
their flame the more, in view of a more luminous and more ardent
radiance.
	            Festugiere, MM. Festugière.
	
         


	
	  1959
		Wednesday 11 February
	    Ash Wednesday--Thomas Alva Edison, Born 1847
	  
	42nd day - 323 days to come
	 
            X(43)
	
            Qui enim a nullis refraenat licitis
vicinus est illictis.
            Whoever does
not refrain from some licit things is close to 
(engaging in) illicit ones.
            (Aug. de Ut. Jejunii 5.)
	

	(Nov. 1964)
	
            Locutus est mihi (Dominus) et dixit[:] Ingredere
et includere in mediodomus tuae.
           (The Lord)
spoke to me and said: Go in and shut thyself up in the midst of thy
house.
            Ezech 3:24
	
	
            To the extent that each man believes the end concerning future blessings & despises human glory & pleasures, he will have couresponding power to control his
thoughts & to be more at peace than a man who loves pleasures.
	            Mark the Ascetic, SaintSt. Mark The Ascetic
(Philokalia)
	

          This and all subsequent translation of scriptural quotation follows the Douay version of the Latin Vulgate text. In November, 1964, Merton participates in an important meeting of abbots and novice masters, holds a retreat for for[sic] the Fellowship of Reconcilliation (FOR), and receives many diverse visitors. See Michael Mott, The Seven Mountains of Thomas Merton. pp. 405-406.



	
	  1959
		Thursday 12 February
	    Abraham Lincoln, Born 1809--Georgia Day
	  
	43rd day - 322 days to come
	 
               X (44)
	
                Ut totis viribus quieti mentis studeas, sine qua nulli licet
callidi hostis insidias circumspicere.
With all your faculties you
ought to be intent on peace of mind, for without it no one can take
heed of the traps set for him by the cunning enemy.
	            Anselm, SaintSt. Anselm, Ep. 37 (S___III. 147)
	
	
Sed vide ne hostes derideant abbata tua, ne illis
serviant otia tua, ne illis vaces, qui vacare Deodebueras.
But see to it
that (your) enemies do not make a mockery of your sabbaths, lest your
inactivity be of service to them, lest your leisure be for them when
it ought to have been for God.
	            Gilbert, of HoylandGilbert of Hoyland
	In Cant. 11.5. PL 184, 60.
	
            
Office of Hermits

  


	
	  1959
		Friday 13 February
	  
	44th day - 321 days to come
	 
               Texts for an Office of Hermits
	
               Levate in caelum oculos vestros et videte sub terra deorsum; quia
caeli sicut fumus liquescent et terra sicut vestimentum atteretur, et
habitatores eius sicut haec interibunt, salus autem mea in sempiternum
erit et justitia mea non deficiet.
        Lift up your eyes
to heaven, and look down to the earth 
beneath: for the heavens shall vanish like smoke, and the earth shall
be worn away like a garment, and the inhabitants thereof shall perish
in like manner: but my salvation shall be forever, and my justice
shall not fail.
               Isa. 51:6
	
	
               Posui verba mea in ore tuo et in umbra manus meae protexi te, ut
plantes caelos et fundes ierram et dicas ad Sion: populus meus es
tu.
    I have put my words in
thy mouth, and have protected thee in 
the shadow of my hand, that thou mightest plant the heavens, and found
the earth: and mightest say to Sion: Thou art my people.
               Isa. 51:16
	

* Merton is inconsistent in his use of
consonantals in Latin: sometimes he retains the classical and
sometimes he uses the medieval.

            
            



	
	  1959
		Saturday 14 February
	    St. Valentine's Day
	  
	45th day - 320 days to come
	 
               X (46)
	
                Non in tumultu exibitis nec in fuga properabitis, praecedet enim
vos Dominus et congregabit vos Deus Israel.
          You shall not go
out in a tumult, neither shall you make haste 
by flight: for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will
gather you together.
               Isa. 52:12
	

Isaac of Neneveh
               Sweep your cell clean of everything superfluous for this will lead
you to abstinence, however unwillingly. Scarcity of all things teaches
a man to be abstinent.
               (Early Fathers from Philokalia
p. 235)
Kadloubovsky, E.
 and Palmer, G.E.H., translators. Early Fathers from the Philokalia. London: Faber and
Faber Limited, 1954

	
	
               If you do not strive you will not find & if you do not
knock at he door with ardor & constantly keep vigil before it, you
will not be heard. EFP. 235
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Sunday 15 February
	    First Sunday in Lent
	  
	46th day - 319 days to come
	 
               X (47)
               ("office" - contd)
	
	            "Sermon" from Isaac, of NinevehIsaac of N.
[ineveh]

               Is there any need
to say anything about men engaged in spiritual endeavor, strangers to
the world, & about hermits? They have made the wilderness a city
& transformed it into the home & the abode of the angels. For
the righteousness of their life the angels always come to them &
as warriors of the same King they have often fought side by side. All
their life have they loved the wilderness & from love of God had
their dwelling in the mountains, caves & precipices of the
earth. Since they have abandoned the earthly & conceived of love
for the heavenly, imitating the angels, the
* text continues on X (48).
	
                In a journal entry for January 11, 1965 Merton notes
Isaac of Nineveh as a favorite:  A little Nietzsche is stimulating, no
doubt, but what I really like to read is Isaac of Neneveh in the
hermitage or Zen Masters in the fields.A Vow of Conversation, p. 133.


            
            



	
	  1959
		Monday 16 February
	  
	47th day - 318 days to come
	 
               X (48)
	
                holy angels themselves have deemed it right not to conceal from
them their countenance & have fulfilled their every wish, giving
them all possible help. 
               EFP. p
237.
	
	
	
	            (Isaac, of NinevehIsaac. contd)
                He is a monk who stays outside the world & is
ever praying to God so that he may gain future blesshings. A monk's
wealth is the comfort he finds in mourning, & the joy of faith
which shines in the secret places of his
mind.
               EFP. 240
	
	
                Blessed are those who from love of God have girded their loins
with unquestioningsimplicity for this sea of suffering & who do not
turn back.
               EFP 244
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Tuesday 17 February
	  
	48th day - 317 days to come
	 
               X (49)
	
                When hope embarks on this passage it crosses the sea with its
first ardour, having no care at all for the body nor deliberating in
itself as to whether or no its labour begun will in any wise
succeed.
	            (Isaac, of NinevehIsaac. EFP. 244)
	
	
	
               God commands that we should undertake the work with readiness to
die for the sake of pleasing Him, & He promises to crown the
faithful laborer with the honour of martyrdom.
               EFP. 246
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Wednesday 18 February
	    Ember Day
	  
	49th day - 316 days to come
	 
               X (50)
               "office" of hermits
	
               Haec dicit Dominus: quomodo si inveniatur granum in botro et
dicatur: ne dissipes illud quoniam benedictio est; Sic faciam propter
servos meos ut non disperdam totum.
      Thus saith the Lord: As if a grain be found in a cluster, and
it be said: Destroy it not, because it is a blessing: so will I do for
the sake of my servants, that I may not destroy the whole.
               Isa. 65:8
	
	
              Ad quem autem respiciam nisi ad pauperculum et contritum spiritu
et trementem sermones meos.
               But to whom shall I look but to him that is poor and little,
and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my words?
               Isa. 66:2
	
⊛
	
               Intrans in domum meam conquiescam cum sapientia: non enim habet
amaritudinem conversatio illius, nec taedium convictus illius, sed
laetitiam et gaudium.
	When I go into my house, I shall repose myself with wisdom: for her
conversation hath no bitterness, nor her company any tediousness, but
joy and gladness.
               Sap 8:16
	
(Jan 31, 1965)*

               * See note on following page.
Addendum Merton's selection of texts under the
title, "Office of Hermits",  begins in this notebook after
November, 1964 and continues through and beyond his fiftieth birthday,
January 31, 1965. Since there were many indications he would soon be
allowed to live in the hermitage permanently, the annual retreat of
January 18-26 was especially important. Merton's "Office for
Hermits" may well have been conceived and begun during this annual
retreat. [See Mott, pp. 410-412 for
events preceding Merton's 
birthday.] How much of Merton's "office" was gathered on his
birthday is impossible to accurately gauge. Was it more than page 50?
Was it limited only to the quotation of Sap 8:16 marked by Merton's
marginalia which signals its importance? Merton's birth date at this
place may well have been added later by him, though this does not
lessen the significance of either the entire page or the one
passage. In any case, the passages of Merton's "office" can be
allowed to "sing" with journal entries marked as written on the
vigil of his birthday and the anniversary itself (Jan. 30-31, 1965):
What I find most in my whole life is illusion, wanting to be something
of which I have formed a concept. I hope I will get free of all that
now, because that is going to be the struggle and yet I have to be
something that I ought to be. I have to meet a certain demand for
order and inner light and tranquillity, God's demand, that is, that I
remove obstacles to His giving me all these. Snow, silence, the
talking fire, the watch on the table, sorrow. What would be the use of
going over all this? I will just get cleaned up (my hands are dirty)
and say the Psalms of my birthday: 'Yet you drew me out of the womb
you entrusted me to my mother's breast placed on your lap from my
birth from my mother's womb you have been my God' (Jan 30) I can
imagine no greater cause for gratitude on my fiftieth birthday than:
that, on it, I woke up in a hermitage. Fierce cold all night,
... . Inside the house, it almost froze, though embers still glowed
under the ashes in the fireplace. The cold woke me up at one point, but
I adjusted the blankets and went back to sleep.  What more do I seek
than this silence, this simplicity, this living together with
wisdom ? For me, there is nothing else... [emphasis added]
(Jan 31) A Vow of Conversation, pp. 141-142. 
            
            



	
	  1959
		Thursday 19 February
	  
	50th day - 315 days to come
	 
               X (51)
	
                The Lord suffers all human weaknesses but abhors a man who is
always complaining, & does not leave him without a lesson. 
	            Isaac, of NinevehIsaac of N.
EFP. p. 269
	
	
               A man who remembering God respects every man, by a
sudden move-ment of God's hand himself receives help from every man.
               id.
	
	
               Praecordia fatui quasi rota carri, et quasi axis versatilis
cogitatus illius.
         The heart of a fool is as a wheel of a cart, and his thoughts
are like a rolling axletree.
               Eccli. [Ecclesiasticus] 33:5  
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Friday 20 February
	Ember Day
        
	51st day - 314 days to come
	 
               X (52)
               ( office )
	
               A cella quippe in caelum saepe
ascenditur; vix autem aut numquam a cella in infernum descenditur,
nisi cogitando de pravis inferni. Moriens autem vix umquam aliquis a
cella in infernum descendit, quia vix umquam aliquis nisi caelo
praedestinatus in ea usque ad mortem persistit: quoniam filium gratiae
cella tanquam fructum ventris sui foret [feret?].
            From the
cell (cella) one can often go up to
heaven (caelum);
but hardly ever or never does one go from the cell down to hell,
except by dwelling on the depraved things of hell. At the moment of
death, hardly ever does anyone go down from the cell to hell, because
hardly ever does anyone persevere in it until death unless he is
predestined for heaven: because the cell bears[?] a son of grace like
the fruit of its womb.
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Saturday 21 February
	    Ember Day
	  
	52nd day - 313 days to come
	 
               X (53)
               "office"
	
               Haec dicit Dns exercituum: Ponite corda vestra super vias
vestras. Seminastis multum et intulistis parum, comedistis et non
estis satiati, bibistis et non estis inebriati, operuistis vos et non
estis calefacti, et qui mercedes congreagavist misit eas in sacculum
pertusum. 
               Thus saith
the Lord of Hosts: Set your hearts to consider your 
ways. You have sowed much, and brought in little: you have eaten, but
have not been sated: you have drunk, but have not been inebriated: you
have clothed yourselves, but have not been warmed: and he that hath
earned wages, put them into a bag with holes.
               Aggaeus 1:5-6
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Sunday 22 February
	    Second Sunday in Lent--George Washington, Born 1732
	  
	53rd day - 312 days to come
	 
               X (54)
               "office"
	
               Ne despicias narrationem presbyterorum sapientium, et in
proverbiis eorum conversare; ab ipsis enim disces sapientiam et
doctrinam intellectus et servire magnatis sine querela. Non te
praetereat narratio seniorum, ipsi enim didicerunt a patribus suis;
quoniam ab ipsis disces intellectum et in tempore necessitatis dare
responsum.
               Despise not the discourse of them
that are ancient and wise, 
but acquaint thyself with their proverbs. For of them thou shalt learn
wisdom, and instruction of understanding, and to serve great men
without quarrel. Let not the discourse of the ancients escape thee,
for they have learned of their fathers: for of them thou shalt learn
understanding, and to given an answer in time of need.
               Ecclus. VIII. 9-12.
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Monday 23 February
	  
	54th day - 311 days to come
	 
               X (55)
	
               
                     "No-Thing" you love must be
                     And from "Thing" you must flee.
                     You must stand alone
                     with no man make your home.
                      From all striving cease, 
                     From all beings find release.
                      Loose what you captive find
                      And what is free fast bind.
                      Bring comfort to the sick
                      For yourself nothing seek.
                      Drink from the spring of bitterness. 
                     To light love's fire bring
                     Fuel of goodness.
                      So will your dwelling
                      Be wilderness.
                  
	            Mccharius, A of MaztMccha, A. of Mazt.
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Tuesday 24 February
	  
	55th day - 310 days to come
	 
               X (56)
		"office"
	
               O Domina et Mater misericordiae quae
mundo edidisti Salvatorem, 
oratrix pro me dignanter assiste. Ad tuum gloriosissimum et singulare
praesidium confugio, et tu, piissima, meis precibus aures tuae
pietatis inclina. Vehementer expavesco ne vita mea tuo dis-pliceat
filio, et illo [sic]
 deprecor ut sicut per te se mundo mani-festavit,
propter te, quaeso, absque dilatione miseratur mei. Qui vivit et
regnat.
 O Lady and Mother of
mercy who gave the world 
the Savior, consent to be my intercessor. I flee to your most gracious
and singular protection, and you, O most faithful one, incline the
ears of your fidelity to my prayers. I strongly fear that my life may
not be pleasing to your son, and I entreat him that, just as he
manifested himself to the world through you, so too, I beg, may he
have pity on me without delay for your sake. Who lives and
reigns.
	            (Odo, Saint, Abbot of ClunySt. Odo)	
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Wednesday 25 February
	  
	56th day - 309 days to come
	 
               X (57)
	
               Fili in mansuetudine serva animam tuam et da illi honorem secundum
meritum tuum.
               My son,
keep thy soul in meekness, and give it 
honor according to its desert.
               Eccli. 10:31
	
	(Stability in solitude.)
	
                Sta in testamento
tuo et in illo colloquere, et in opere mandatorum tuorum veterasce. Ne
manseris in operibus peccatorum, confide autem
in Deo et in mane in loco tuo.
               Be
steadfast in thy covenant, and be 
conversant therein, and grow old in the work of thy
commandments. Abide not in the works of sinners, but trust in God
and stay in thy place.
               Eccli. 11:21-22.
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Thursday 26 February
	  
	57th day - 308 days to come
	 
               X (58)
               office
	
	            Prayer of Fulbert, Saint, Bishop of ChartresFulbert of Chartres (excerpt)
                Impetra
michi sancta Virgo Maria spatium et locum penitentiae ut non sinar in
vacuum ducere dies huic mortali vitae concessos. Sancta Dei Genitrix
perpetua Virgo Maria, intercede pro me, ut omnipotens Deus aperire
dignetur michi voluntatem suam, qualiter anima mea possit slava
fieri. Dancta Dei Genitrix perpetua Virgo Maria, impetra michi
compunctionis lacrimas, ut innumerabilia peccata mea incessanter
defleam, ut sicut fuit michi dulce peccare ita michi sit dulce
paenitere et lugere, non solum propria sed et aliena commissa.
O Holy Virgin Mary, obtain
for me a space and a place of repentence that I may not be allowed to
spend vainly the days granted to this mortal life. Holy Mother of God,
ever Virgin Mary, obtain for me the tears of compunction that I may
weep incessantly for my numberless sins, so that, just as sinning was
sweet to me, so too I may find it sweet to do penance and mourn, not
only for my own sins but also for those committed by others.
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Friday 27 February
	  
	58th day - 307 days to come
	 
               X (59)
	
	            From Psalter of Robert of Molesme, SaintRobert of Molesme
               O intemerata et in
aeternum benedicta, specialis et incomparabilis Dei Genitrix Virgo
Maria, gratissimum Dei templum, Spiritus Sancti sacrarium, ianua
caelorum, per quam post Deum totus vivit orbis terrarum, inclina aures
tuae sanctae virginalis humilitatis et pietatis indignis
supplicationibus meis, et esto michi miserrimo peccatori pia et
propitia in omnibus auxiliatrix.  
O Mother of God, Virgin Mary,
fearless and forever blessed, singular and incomparable, most pleasing
temple of God, tabernacle of the Holy Spirit, gate of heaven, through
whom--after God--all on earth have their life: incline the ears of
your holy virginal humility and fidelity to my unworthy prayers, and
in all things be for me, a most wretched sinner, a faithful and
well-disposed helper.
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Saturday 28 February
	  
	59th day - 306 days to come
	 
               X (60)
		+
	
                Fugite de medio Babylonis et salvet 
unusquisque animam suam;
nolitetacere super iniquitatem eius,quoniam tempus ultionis est
a Domino, vicissitudinem ipse retribuetei. Calix aureus Babylon in
manu Domini inebrians omnem terram; de vino eius biberunt gentes et ido
commotae sunt. Subito cecidit Babylon et contrita est. Ulutate super
eam; tol[l]ite resinam ad
dolorem eius si forte sanetur.Curavimus 
Babylonem et non est sanata, derelinquamus eam et eamus unusquisque in
terram suam, quoniam pervenit usque ad caelos judicium eius, et elevatum
est usque ad numbes.
Flee yet from the midst of
Babylon, and let every one save his own life: be not silent upon her
iniquity: for it is the time of revenge from the Lord, he will render
unto her what she hath deserved. Babylon hath been a golden cup in the
hand of the Lord, that made all the earth drunk: the nations have
drunk of her wine, and therefore they have staggered. Babylon is
suddenly fallen, and destroyed: howl for her, take balm for her pain,
if so she may be healed. We would have cured Babylon, but she is not
healed: let us forsake her, and let us go every man to his own land:
because her judgment hath reached even to the heavens, and is lifted
up to the clouds.
               Jerem. 51. [69]
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Sunday 1 March
	    Third Sunday in Lent
	  
	60th day - 305 days to come
	 
               X (61)
	
               Cur per multa vagaris homuncio, quaerendo bona animae tuae et
corporis tui? Ama unum bonum in quo sunt omnia bona, et
sufficit.
 Why, little man, do you run
from one thing to another, searching for the goods of your soul and of
your body? Love the one good in which are all goods, and that will
suffice.
	            Anselm, SaintAnselm. Proslogion
XXV
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Monday 2 March
	   Texas Independence Day
	  
	61st day - 304 days to come
	 
               X (62)
	
               Deficient pueri et laborabunt, et iuvenes in infirmitate cadent;
qui autem sperant in Domino mutabunt fortitudinem, adsument pennas
sicut aquilae, current et non laborabunt, ambulabunt et non deficient.
   Youths shall faint and
labor, and young men shall fall by 
infirmity. But they that hope in the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall take wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not faint.
               Isa. 40:30-31
	
	
               Et exspectabo Dominum qui abscondit faciem suam a domo Jacob et
praestolabor eum.
     And I will wait for
the Lord, who hath hid his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for
him.
               Isa. 8:17
	

That Isaias be included in the
"office of hermits" is not accidental. Isaias as an important source
for Merton in understanding his monastic and hermit aspirations has
had a long history in Merton's writing. In 1951 Merton writes:
Do you suppose I have a spiritual life? I have none, I am indigence, I
am silence, I am poverty, I am solitude, for I have renounced
spirituality to find God, and He it is Who preaches loud in the depths
of my indigence, saying: I will pour out my spirit upon thy
children and they shall spring up among the herbs as willows beside
the running waters(Isaias,
55:3-4).  The children of thy 
barrenness shall say in thy ears: The place is too strait for me, make
me room to dwell in(Isaias,
49:20). I die of love for you, 
Compassion: I take you for my Lady, as Francis married poverty I marry
you, the Queen of hermits and the Mother of the poor. 
The Sign of Jonas. New York:
Image Books edition,
1956. pp. 323-324. 
            
            



	
	  1959
		Tuesday 3 March
	  
	62nd day - 303 days to come
	 
               X (63)
	
                (Christus) luctatus est eum et vicit: erat enim homo pro patribus
certans, et per obedientiam, inobedientiam persolvens: alligavit enim
fortem, et solvit infirmos, et salutem donavit plasmati suo, destruens
peccatum. Est enim piissimus et misericors Dominus et amans humanum
genus.  
(Christ) laid hold of him and defeated him: for he was
a man combatting for his ancestors, and undoing (their) disobedience
by (his) obedience: he fettered the strong one and he released the
weak, and he gave salvation to his creation, destroying sin. Thus, he
is a most faithful and merciful Lord, one who loves the human
race.
	            Irenaeus, Saint, Bishop of Lyont. Irenaeus Adv.
	III.xix.5  (_____
p. 47n.)
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Wednesday 4 March
	  
	63rd day - 302 days to come
	 
               X (64)
	
               Insuper et sabbata mea dedi eis ut essent signum inter me et eos
et scirent quia ego Dominus sanctificans eos.  
Moreover I gave
them also my sabbaths to be a sign between me and them: and that they
might know that I am the Lord that sanctify
them.
               Ezech. XX. 12
	
	
               Dixi autem ad filios eorum in solitudine: In praeceptis patrum
vestrorum nolite incedere, ne judicia eorum custodiatis, nec in idolis
eorum polluamini. Ego Dominus Deus vester, in praeceptis meis
ambulate, judicia mea custodite et facite eas et sabbata mea
sanctificate ut sint signum inter me et vos et sciatis quia ego sum
Dominus Deus vester.
And I said to their
children in the wilderness: Walk not in the statutes of your fathers,
and observe not their judgments, nor be ye defiled with their idols: I
am the Lord your God: walk ye in my statutes and observe my judgments,
and do them. And sanctify my sabbaths, that they may be a sign between
me and you: and that you may know that I am the Lord your God.
               Ezech. XX. 18-20
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Thursday 5 March
	  
	64th day - 301 days to come
	 
               X (65)
	
                Inter sanctum et profanum non
habuerunt distantiam et inter 
pollutum et mundum non intellexerunt et a sabbatis meis averterunt
oculos meos et conqui-nabar in medio eorum.... Et quaesivi de eis
virum qui interponeret sepem et staret oppositus contra me pro terra
ne dissiparem eam, et non inveni.
They have put no difference
between holy and profane nor have distinguished between the polluted
and the clean and they have turned away their eyes from my sabbaths
and I was profaned in the midst of them.... And I sought among them
for a man that might set up a hedge and stand in the gap before me in
favor of the land, that I might not destroy it: and I found
none.
               Ezech. XXII. [26b, 30]
	
            
            



	
	  1959
		Friday 6 March
	  
	65th day - 300 days to come
	 
               X (66)
	
               Ephraim pascit ventum et sequitur aestum tota die. Mendacium et
vastitatem multiplicat... Et tu ad Deum tuum converteris,
misericordiam et judicium custodi et spera in Deo tuo semper.
Ephraim feedeth on the
wind and followeth the heat all the day long. He multiplies lies and
desolation... Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment
and hope in thy God always.
               Osee. 12:2,7.
[in standard editions, verses are 1 and
6.]
	
            



Bibliography of the sources which Merton consulted during the writing of Journal #10, "The Red Diary," which have been conclusively identified.

  

A Friend of God (14th Century). The Book of the Poor in Spirit. Edited by
C.F. Kelley. New York,
Harper & Brothers,
1954.

Bars, Henry. Maritain en Notre Temps. Paris, Editions Bernard
Grasset, 1959.

Basetti-Sani, Giulio. Mohammed et Saint Francois. Ottawa, Commissariat
De TerreSainte, 1959.

Frankl, Victor E. From Death Camp to Existentialism. Boston, Beacon
Press, 1959.

Heschel, Abraham J.
Between God and Man. Edited by Fritz
A. Rothschild. Toronto,
Collier Macmillan, 1959.

Kadloubovsky, E. and Palmer, G.E.H., translators. Early Fathers from the Philokalia. London,
Faber & Faber, Ltd.,
1953.

Scholem, Gershom G. Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. New York,
Schocken Books, Inc., 1946.


Sofrony, Archimandrite. The Undistorted Image. Translated by Rosemary
Edmunds. London, The Faith
Press, 1958.




 Index to Thomas Merton's Journal # 10, "The Red Diary"

A Vow of Conversation, n. 38, n. 47, n. 50
Akasakov, I., 6
Anselm, Saint, 44, 61
Bars, H., 23
Barth, Karl, 36
Basetti-Sani, G., 29
Between God and Man, 37
Boulgakov, S., 12
Buber, Martin, 39
Bukharev, A.M., 9, 10, 11
Canisius, S.J., Peter, 17
Cell, the monastic, 46, 50, 52, 57
Chuang Tzu, 24-28, 31
Clement, O., 32
Collectivism, 39-41
Conjectures of A Guilty Bystander, n. 7, n. 28,
n. 33, n. 41
Del Vasto, Lanza, 18
Dostoievsky, Fyodor, 5
Early Fathers from the Philokalia, 43, 46-49, 51
Ecclesiasticus, 51, 54, 57
Ephraim, Saint, 5
Essence of Christianity, 5
Ezechial, 43, 64-65
Favre, S.J., Peter, 16
Festugiere, M., 42
Filaret, Metropolitan, 8
Foolishness, spirituality of, 9
Frankl, Victor, 19-20
From Death Camp to Existentialism, 19-20
Fulbert of Chartres, 58
Gilbert of Hoyland, 44
Govodetzky, 11
Haleq, 29
Heraclitus, 13-15
Heschel, Abraham, 37
Holiness, 32
Humility, 8-9, 33-34, 36, 50, 57
Individualism, 39-40
Irenaeus, 63
Isaac of Nineveh, 46-49, 51
Isaias, 45, 50, 62
Jeremias, 60
Kadloubovsky, E., 46
Khomiakov, 6
Mabillon, 42
Macarious of Optino, Staretz, 32-34
Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism, 22
Maritain en Notre Temps, 23
Maritain, Jacques, 23
Mark the Ascetic, 43
Mary, Mother of God, 56, 58-59
Mccharius, A of Mazt, 55
Mohammed et Saint Francois, 29
Mott, Michael, n. 43
Newman, John Henry Cardinal, 7
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 39-40
Odo, Saint, 56
"Office of Hermits," 45-66, dating of, n. 50
Osee, 66
Our Father, the prayer, in Greek, 4
Palmer, G.E.H., 46
Philokalia, 16, 43, 46-49, 51
Prajnaparamita Sutra, 29
Prayer, 33, 35
Prayers, Our Father, 4, of St. Ephrain, 5, of St. Odo, 56, of
Fulbert of Chartres, 58, from Psalter of Robert of Molesme, 59
Racism, as collective sin, 41
Robert of Molesme, 59
Sabbath, 44, 64
Scholem, Gershom, 22
Secret of the heart, 49
Silence, 30
Silouan, Staretz, 33
Simplicity, 48, n. 50
Sophrony [Sofrony], Archimandrite, 33-35
Stability in solitude, 57
Suffering as a task, 19-20, 48
Sylvan, Staretz, 33
The Book of the Poor in Spirit, 30
The Seven Mountains of Thomas Merton, n. 43
The Sign of Jonas, n. 62
The Undistorted Image, 33
Wisdom, 26, 29, 34, 37, 50, 54




Synopsis of Pages

Thomas Merton's Journal #10, "The Red Diary"


Frontispiece  Ad Usum Fr. M. Louis
1-3 Blank
4  The Our Father [Greek]
5  Prayer of St. Ephrem; Fyodor Dostoievsky
6  Khomiakov; Aksakov, I.
7  John Henry Newman
8  Metropolitan Filaret
9  A.M. Bukharev
10 A.M. Bukharev (on Job)
11 Govodetsky
12 S. Boulgakov
13 - 15 Heraclitus
16 Peter Favre, S.J. [French]
17 Peter Canisius, S.J. [French]
18 Lanza del Vasto [French]
19 - 20 Victor Frankl, From Death Camp to Existentialism 
21 blank
22 Rabbi Hanina from
Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism
23 Jaques Maritain
24 - 28 Chuang Tzu
29 Prajnaparamita Sutra
30 Book of the Poor in Spirit
31 Chuang Tzu
32 O. Clement; Staretz Macarius of Optino
33 Macarius of Optino; Staretz Sylvan
34 Macarius of Optino; Archimandrite Sophrony
35 Archimandrite Sophrony
36 Karl Barth
37 Abraham J. Heschel, Between God and Man
38 Reinhold Niebuhr
39 Martin Buber; Reinhold Niebuhr
40 - 41 Reinhold Niebuhr
42 Mabillon; M. Festugiere [French]
43 Nov, 1964; Ezechiel [Latin]; St. Mark the Ascetic from
	  Early Fathers from the Philokalia (EFP)
44 Anselm; Gilbert of Hoyland
45 Texts for an Office of
Hermits ("office"); Isaias
		[Latin]
46 "office":
Isaias [Latin]; Isaac of Nineveh from EFP
47 - 49 "office": Isaac of Nineveh
50 "office":
Isaias; Book of Wisdom [Latin]; January
		31, 1965
51 "office":
Isaac of Nineveh; Ecclesiasticus [Latin]
52 "office": Unidentified author [Latin]
53 "office": from Aggaeus [Latin]
54 "office": Ecclesiasticus [Latin]
55 "office": Mccha, A. of Mazt.
56 "office": Prayer of St. Odo to Mary, Mother of God
		[Latin]
57 "office": Ecclesiasticus [Latin]
58 "office": Prayer of Fulbert of Chartres to Mary, Mother of God [Latin]
59 "office": Prayer from the Psalter of Robert of Molesme
	to Mary, Mother of God [Latin]
60 "office": Jeremias [Latin]
61 "office": Anselm from Proslogion [Latin]
62 "office": Isaias [Latin]
63 "office": Irenaeus [Latin]
64, 65 "office": Ezechiel [Latin]
66 "office": Osee [Latin]
67 - 365 blank